README.md, before:

# ZChecker v2.0.0
ZTF moving target checker for short object lists.

## Requirements
* Python 3.5+
* astropy v2.0+
* [sbsearch](https://github.com/Small-Bodies-Node/sbsearch)
* [sbpy](https://github.com/NASA-Planetary-Science/sbpy) current dev version
* requests
* astroquery 0.3.9
* sqlite
* wget

### Optional packages
* Montage and montage_wrapper, optional, for image reprojection with ``zproject``
* [oorb](https://github.com/oorb/oorb) and its Python wrapper for Minor Planet Center Possible Comet Confirmation Page (PCCP) checking

## Configuration

Create a file with your preferred locations for the database, log
file, etc. in `~/.config/zchecker.config`.  To see the file format and
current allowed configuration parameters::

  ```
$ zchecker --help
  
...
{
  "database": "/path/to/zchecker.db",
  "log": "/path/to/zchecker.log",
  "user": "IRSA account user name",
  "password": "IRSA account password",
  "cutout path": "/path/to/cutout/directory",
  "stack path": "/path/to/stack/directory"
}

```

## Ephemerides

1. (Optional) Make a list of objects: `objects.list`.

1. Update local database with ephemerides, specifying objects through
   the list or on the command line::

     `zchecker eph-update objects.list --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD` 

     `zchecker eph-update "C/2017 Y1, C/2017 Y2" --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD`

   Broad date ranges are best.  Ephemerides can be updated as the
   orbital elements are refined.

1. Delete ephemerides from the database::

     `zchecker eph-update --clean objects.list`
     
     `zchecker eph-update --clean objects.list --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD` 
     
     `zchecker eph-update --clean "C/2017 Y1, C/2017 Y2" --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD`


## Usage

1. Update local database with ZTF observations from a single night::

     `zchecker ztf-update --date=YYYY-MM-DD`

   Or to simply check the last night::
	
     `zchecker ztf-update`

1. Summarize nights in the local database::

     `zchecker list-nights`

1. Find observations of your targets from the last night::

     `zchecker search`

   For a specific date::

     `zchecker search --date=YYYY-MM-DD`
	
   Over a range of dates::
	
     `zchecker search --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD`

   For all dates in the local database::

     `zchecker search --full`
	
   For a subset of targets saved to the file `subset.list`::

     `zchecker search subset.list --full`
	
   For a subset of targets specified on the command line::

     `zchecker search "C/2017 AB5" --full`
     
     `zchecker search "C/2017 Y1,C/2017 Y2" --full`

   Using a different V magnitude limit::

     `zchecker search "C/2017 Y1,C/2017 Y2" --full --vmax=18`

1. Report previously found objects::

     `zchecker list-found "C/2017 Y1,C/2017 Y2"`
	 
   For a specific date / date range::
   
     `zchecker list-found --date=2018-11-01`
	 
     `zchecker list-found --start=2018-11-01 --stop=2018-11-12`

1. Clean the found object database and associated cutout files, if they exist::

     `zchecker clean-found "C/2017 AB5"`
     
     `zchecker clean-found "C/2017 AB5" --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD`

1. Download cutouts around each found target::

     `zchecker download-cutouts`

1. Reproject downloaded cutouts to align projected velocity vectors and comet-Sun vectors along the +x axis::

     `zproject`
	 
1. Make nightly and bi-weekly stacks by object.

     `zstack`

## Database

### `nights`

Summary of ZTF observations by night, as downloaded from IRSA.

| Column    | Type    | Source   | Description               |
|-----------|---------|----------|---------------------------|
| nightid   | integer | zchecker | unique night identifier   |
| date      | text    | user     | UT date                   |
| exposures | integer | IRSA     | number of exposures       |
| quads     | integer | IRSA     | number of image quadrants |


### `obj`

Objects.

| Column | Type    | Source   | Description              |
|--------|---------|----------|--------------------------|
| objid  | integer | zchecker | unique object identifier |
| desg   | text    | user     | target designation       |

### `eph`

Object ephemerides.  The default time step is 1/day, with smaller time
steps for objects closer to the Earth.

| Column    | Type    | Source   | Description                                                   |
|-----------|---------|----------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| ephid     | integer | zchecker | unique ephemeris identifier                                   |
| objid     | integer | zchecker | unique object identifier from `obj` table                     |
| jd        | float   | zchecker | ephemeris epoch (Julian date)                                 |
| rh        | float   | JPL/MPC  | heliocentric distance (au)                                    |
| delta     | float   | JPL/MPC  | observer-target distance (au)                                 |
| ra        | float   | JPL/MPC  | Right Ascension (radians)                                     |
| dec       | float   | JPL/MPC  | Declination (radians)                                         |
| dra       | float   | JPL/MPC  | Right Ascension * cos(Declination) rate of change (arcsec/hr) |
| ddec      | float   | JPL/MPC  | Declination rate of change (arcsec/hr)                        |
| vmag      | float   | JPL/MPC  | brightness estimate (magnitude)                               |
| retrieved | text    | zchecker | date of ephemeris retrieval                                   |


### `eph_tree`

R-tree of object ephemerides.

| Column | Type    | Source   | Description                                                      |
|--------|---------|----------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ephid  | integer | zchecker | unique ephemeris identifier from `eph` table                     |
| mjd0   | float   | zchecker | time bounding box (modified Julian date)                         |
| mjd1   | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| x0     | float   | zchecker | spatial bounding box in Cartesian coordinates on the unit sphere |
| x1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| y0     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| y1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| z0     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| z1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |

### `obs`

Basic observation parameters.

| Column   | Type    | Source   | Description                             |
|----------|---------|----------|-----------------------------------------|
| obsid    | integer | zchecker | unique observation identifier           |
| source   | text    | zchecker | data source (ztf)                       |
| jd_start | float   | IRSA     | exposure start time                     |
| jd_stop  | float   | zchecker | exposure stop time (jd_start + exptime) |
| fov      | blob    | IRSA     | ra, dec of center and four corners      |

### `obs_tree`

R-tree of observations.

| Column | Type    | Source   | Description                                                      |
|--------|---------|----------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| obsid  | integer | zchecker | unique observation identifier from `obs` table                   |
| mjd0   | float   | zchecker | time bounding box (modified Julian date)                         |
| mjd1   | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| x0     | float   | zchecker | spatial bounding box in Cartesian coordinates on the unit sphere |
| x1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| y0     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| y1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| z0     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| z1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |


### `ztf`

ZTF observation metadata.

| Column      | Type    | Source   | Description                                                              |
|-------------|---------|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| obsid       | integer | zchecker | unique observation identifier from `obs` table                           |
| pid         | integer | ZTF      | science product ID, unique                                               |
| obsdate     | text    | zchecker | observation mid-time (UT)                                                |
| infobits    | integer | ZTF      | info bit flags, see Section 10.4 of the [ZTF Science Data System][1]     |
| field       | integer | ZTF      | ZTF field number                                                         |
| ccdid       | integer | ZTF      | detector chip ID (1, ...16), see Fig. 1 of [ZTF Science Data System][1]  |
| qid         | integer | ZTF      | CCD quadrant ID (1, 2, 3, 4), see Fig. 1 of [ZTF Science Data System][1] |
| rcid        | integer | ZTF      | readout channel ID (0, ...63)                                            |
| fid         | integer | ZTF      | filter ID                                                                |
| filtercode  | text    | ZTF      | abbreviated filter name: zr, zg, zi                                      |
| expid       | integer | ZTF      | exposure ID                                                              |
| filefracday | integer | ZTF      | fractional time of day of exposure (UT)                                  |
| seeing      | float   | ZTF      | seeing FWHM (arcsec)                                                     |
| airmass     | float   | ZTF      | telescope airmass                                                        |
| moonillf    | float   | ZTF      | Moon illuminated fraction                                                |
| maglimit    | float   | ZTF      | magnitude limit                                                          |

[1]: http://web.ipac.caltech.edu/staff/fmasci/ztf/ztf_pipelines_deliverables.pdf

### `found`

Found objects and observation geometry at image mid-time.

| Column      | Type    | Source   | Description                                                     |
|-------------|---------|----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| foundid     | integer | zchecker | unique identifier                                               |
| objid       | integer | zchecker | unique object identifier from `obj` table                       |
| obsid       | integer | zchecker | unique observation identifier from `obs` table                  |
| obsjd       | float   | zchecker | mid-point of the observation and epoch for ephemeris            |
| ra          | float   | JPL      | Right Ascension (degrees)                                       |
| dec         | float   | JPL      | Declination (degrees)                                           |
| dra         | float   | JPL      | Right Ascension * cos(Declination) rate of change (arcsec/hr)   |
| ddec        | float   | JPL      | Declination rate of change (arcsec/hr)                          |
| ra3sig      | float   | JPL      | Right Ascension 3σ uncertainty (arcsec)                         |
| dec3sig     | float   | JPL      | Declination 3σ uncertainty (arcsec)                             |
| vmag        | float   | JPL      | brightness estimate (magnitude)                                 |
| rh          | float   | JPL      | heliocentric distance (au)                                      |
| rdot        | float   | JPL      | heliocentric distance rate of change (km/s)                     |
| delta       | float   | JPL      | observer-target distance (au)                                   |
| phase       | float   | JPL      | phase angle (degrees)                                           |
| selong      | float   | JPL      | solar elongation (degrees)                                      |
| sangle      | float   | JPL      | projected comet-sun vector position angle (degrees E of N)      |
| vangle      | float   | JPL      | projected comet velocity vector position angle (degrees E of N) |
| trueanomaly | float   | HORIZONS | true anomaly based on osculating elements (degrees)             |
| tmtp        | float   | HORIZONS | T-Tp, time from perihelion, based on osculating elements (days) |

### `ztf_cutouts`

| Column      | Type    | Source   | Description                                          |
|-------------|---------|----------|------------------------------------------------------|
| foundid     | integer | zchecker | unique identifier from `found` table                 |
| retrieved   | text    | zchecker | date cutout was downloaded                           |
| archivefile | text    | zchecker | file name                                            |
| sciimg      | integer | zchecker | flag for science image presence                      |
| mskimg      | integer | zchecker | flag for mask image                                  |
| refimg      | integer | zchecker | flag for reference image                             |
| scipsf      | integer | zchecker | flag for science image PSF                           |
| diffimg     | integer | zchecker | flag for difference image                            |
| diffpsf     | integer | zchecker | flag for difference image PSF                        |
| vangleimg   | integer | zchecker | flag for projected image aligned with velocity angle |
| sangleimg   | integer | zchecker | flag for projected image aligned with sun angle      |

### Schema summary

![schema](db-schema.png)

Commit message:

Revised zstack, required schema updates.

README.md, after:

# ZChecker v2.0.0
ZTF moving target checker for short object lists.

## Requirements
* Python 3.5+
* astropy v2.0+
* [sbsearch](https://github.com/Small-Bodies-Node/sbsearch)
* [sbpy](https://github.com/NASA-Planetary-Science/sbpy) current dev version
* requests
* astroquery 0.3.9
* sqlite
* wget

### Optional packages
* Montage and montage_wrapper, optional, for image reprojection with ``zproject``
* [oorb](https://github.com/oorb/oorb) and its Python wrapper for Minor Planet Center Possible Comet Confirmation Page (PCCP) checking

## Configuration

Create a file with your preferred locations for the database, log
file, etc. in `~/.config/zchecker.config`.  To see the file format and
current allowed configuration parameters::

  ```
$ zchecker --help
  
...
{
  "database": "/path/to/zchecker.db",
  "log": "/path/to/zchecker.log",
  "user": "IRSA account user name",
  "password": "IRSA account password",
  "cutout path": "/path/to/cutout/directory",
  "stack path": "/path/to/stack/directory"
}

```

## Ephemerides

1. (Optional) Make a list of objects: `objects.list`.

1. Update local database with ephemerides, specifying objects through
   the list or on the command line::

     `zchecker eph-update objects.list --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD` 

     `zchecker eph-update "C/2017 Y1, C/2017 Y2" --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD`

   Broad date ranges are best.  Ephemerides can be updated as the
   orbital elements are refined.

1. Delete ephemerides from the database::

     `zchecker eph-update --clean objects.list`
     
     `zchecker eph-update --clean objects.list --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD` 
     
     `zchecker eph-update --clean "C/2017 Y1, C/2017 Y2" --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD`


## Usage

1. Update local database with ZTF observations from a single night::

     `zchecker ztf-update --date=YYYY-MM-DD`

   Or to simply check the last night::
	
     `zchecker ztf-update`

1. Summarize nights in the local database::

     `zchecker list-nights`

1. Find observations of your targets from the last night::

     `zchecker search`

   For a specific date::

     `zchecker search --date=YYYY-MM-DD`
	
   Over a range of dates::
	
     `zchecker search --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD`

   For all dates in the local database::

     `zchecker search --full`
	
   For a subset of targets saved to the file `subset.list`::

     `zchecker search subset.list --full`
	
   For a subset of targets specified on the command line::

     `zchecker search "C/2017 AB5" --full`
     
     `zchecker search "C/2017 Y1,C/2017 Y2" --full`

   Using a different V magnitude limit::

     `zchecker search "C/2017 Y1,C/2017 Y2" --full --vmax=18`

1. Report previously found objects::

     `zchecker list-found "C/2017 Y1,C/2017 Y2"`
	 
   For a specific date / date range::
   
     `zchecker list-found --date=2018-11-01`
	 
     `zchecker list-found --start=2018-11-01 --stop=2018-11-12`

1. Clean the found object database and associated cutout files, if they exist::

     `zchecker clean-found "C/2017 AB5"`
     
     `zchecker clean-found "C/2017 AB5" --start=YYYY-MM-DD --stop=YYYY-MM-DD`

1. Download cutouts around each found target::

     `zchecker download-cutouts`

1. Reproject downloaded cutouts to align projected velocity vectors and comet-Sun vectors along the +x axis::

     `zproject`
	 
1. Make nightly and bi-weekly stacks by object.

     `zstack`

## Database

### `nights`

Summary of ZTF observations by night, as downloaded from IRSA.

| Column    | Type    | Source   | Description               |
|-----------|---------|----------|---------------------------|
| nightid   | integer | zchecker | unique night identifier   |
| date      | text    | user     | UT date                   |
| exposures | integer | IRSA     | number of exposures       |
| quads     | integer | IRSA     | number of image quadrants |


### `obj`

Objects.

| Column | Type    | Source   | Description              |
|--------|---------|----------|--------------------------|
| objid  | integer | zchecker | unique object identifier |
| desg   | text    | user     | target designation       |

### `eph`

Object ephemerides.  The default time step is 1/day, with smaller time
steps for objects closer to the Earth.

| Column    | Type    | Source   | Description                                                   |
|-----------|---------|----------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| ephid     | integer | zchecker | unique ephemeris identifier                                   |
| objid     | integer | zchecker | unique object identifier from `obj` table                     |
| jd        | float   | zchecker | ephemeris epoch (Julian date)                                 |
| rh        | float   | JPL/MPC  | heliocentric distance (au)                                    |
| delta     | float   | JPL/MPC  | observer-target distance (au)                                 |
| ra        | float   | JPL/MPC  | Right Ascension (radians)                                     |
| dec       | float   | JPL/MPC  | Declination (radians)                                         |
| dra       | float   | JPL/MPC  | Right Ascension * cos(Declination) rate of change (arcsec/hr) |
| ddec      | float   | JPL/MPC  | Declination rate of change (arcsec/hr)                        |
| vmag      | float   | JPL/MPC  | brightness estimate (magnitude)                               |
| retrieved | text    | zchecker | date of ephemeris retrieval                                   |


### `eph_tree`

R-tree of object ephemerides.

| Column | Type    | Source   | Description                                                      |
|--------|---------|----------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ephid  | integer | zchecker | unique ephemeris identifier from `eph` table                     |
| mjd0   | float   | zchecker | time bounding box (modified Julian date)                         |
| mjd1   | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| x0     | float   | zchecker | spatial bounding box in Cartesian coordinates on the unit sphere |
| x1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| y0     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| y1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| z0     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| z1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |

### `obs`

Basic observation parameters.

| Column   | Type    | Source   | Description                             |
|----------|---------|----------|-----------------------------------------|
| obsid    | integer | zchecker | unique observation identifier           |
| source   | text    | zchecker | data source (ztf)                       |
| jd_start | float   | IRSA     | exposure start time                     |
| jd_stop  | float   | zchecker | exposure stop time (jd_start + exptime) |
| fov      | blob    | IRSA     | ra, dec of center and four corners      |

### `obs_tree`

R-tree of observations.

| Column | Type    | Source   | Description                                                      |
|--------|---------|----------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| obsid  | integer | zchecker | unique observation identifier from `obs` table                   |
| mjd0   | float   | zchecker | time bounding box (modified Julian date)                         |
| mjd1   | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| x0     | float   | zchecker | spatial bounding box in Cartesian coordinates on the unit sphere |
| x1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| y0     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| y1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| z0     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |
| z1     | float   | zchecker |                                                                  |


### `ztf`

ZTF observation metadata.

| Column      | Type    | Source   | Description                                                              |
|-------------|---------|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| obsid       | integer | zchecker | unique observation identifier from `obs` table                           |
| pid         | integer | ZTF      | science product ID, unique                                               |
| obsdate     | text    | zchecker | observation mid-time (UT)                                                |
| infobits    | integer | ZTF      | info bit flags, see Section 10.4 of the [ZTF Science Data System][1]     |
| field       | integer | ZTF      | ZTF field number                                                         |
| ccdid       | integer | ZTF      | detector chip ID (1, ...16), see Fig. 1 of [ZTF Science Data System][1]  |
| qid         | integer | ZTF      | CCD quadrant ID (1, 2, 3, 4), see Fig. 1 of [ZTF Science Data System][1] |
| rcid        | integer | ZTF      | readout channel ID (0, ...63)                                            |
| fid         | integer | ZTF      | filter ID                                                                |
| filtercode  | text    | ZTF      | abbreviated filter name: zr, zg, zi                                      |
| expid       | integer | ZTF      | exposure ID                                                              |
| filefracday | integer | ZTF      | fractional time of day of exposure (UT)                                  |
| seeing      | float   | ZTF      | seeing FWHM (arcsec)                                                     |
| airmass     | float   | ZTF      | telescope airmass                                                        |
| moonillf    | float   | ZTF      | Moon illuminated fraction                                                |
| maglimit    | float   | ZTF      | magnitude limit                                                          |

[1]: http://web.ipac.caltech.edu/staff/fmasci/ztf/ztf_pipelines_deliverables.pdf

### `found`

Found objects and observation geometry at image mid-time.

| Column      | Type    | Source   | Description                                                     |
|-------------|---------|----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| foundid     | integer | zchecker | unique identifier                                               |
| objid       | integer | zchecker | unique object identifier from `obj` table                       |
| obsid       | integer | zchecker | unique observation identifier from `obs` table                  |
| obsjd       | float   | zchecker | mid-point of the observation and epoch for ephemeris            |
| ra          | float   | JPL      | Right Ascension (degrees)                                       |
| dec         | float   | JPL      | Declination (degrees)                                           |
| dra         | float   | JPL      | Right Ascension * cos(Declination) rate of change (arcsec/hr)   |
| ddec        | float   | JPL      | Declination rate of change (arcsec/hr)                          |
| ra3sig      | float   | JPL      | Right Ascension 3σ uncertainty (arcsec)                         |
| dec3sig     | float   | JPL      | Declination 3σ uncertainty (arcsec)                             |
| vmag        | float   | JPL      | brightness estimate (magnitude)                                 |
| rh          | float   | JPL      | heliocentric distance (au)                                      |
| rdot        | float   | JPL      | heliocentric distance rate of change (km/s)                     |
| delta       | float   | JPL      | observer-target distance (au)                                   |
| phase       | float   | JPL      | phase angle (degrees)                                           |
| selong      | float   | JPL      | solar elongation (degrees)                                      |
| sangle      | float   | JPL      | projected comet-sun vector position angle (degrees E of N)      |
| vangle      | float   | JPL      | projected comet velocity vector position angle (degrees E of N) |
| trueanomaly | float   | HORIZONS | true anomaly based on osculating elements (degrees)             |
| tmtp        | float   | HORIZONS | T-Tp, time from perihelion, based on osculating elements (days) |

### `ztf_cutouts`

| Column      | Type    | Source   | Description                                          |
|-------------|---------|----------|------------------------------------------------------|
| foundid     | integer | zchecker | unique identifier from `found` table                 |
| stackid     | integer | zchecker | unique identifier from `ztf_stacks` table            |
| retrieved   | text    | zchecker | date cutout was downloaded                           |
| archivefile | text    | zchecker | file name                                            |
| sciimg      | integer | zchecker | flag for science image presence                      |
| mskimg      | integer | zchecker | flag for mask image                                  |
| refimg      | integer | zchecker | flag for reference image                             |
| scipsf      | integer | zchecker | flag for science image PSF                           |
| diffimg     | integer | zchecker | flag for difference image                            |
| diffpsf     | integer | zchecker | flag for difference image PSF                        |
| vangleimg   | integer | zchecker | flag for projected image aligned with velocity angle |
| sangleimg   | integer | zchecker | flag for projected image aligned with sun angle      |

### `ztf_stacks`

| Column    | Type    | Source   | Description           |
|-----------|---------|----------|-----------------------|
| stackid   | integer | zchecker | unique indentifier    |
| stackfile | text    | zchecker | file name             |
| stackdate | text    | zchecker | date data was stacked |

There is a one-to-many mapping of stackid to foundid that should be
preserved upon multiple runs of ``zstack``.

### Schema summary

![schema](db-schema.png)
